cmd/srebot/README.md, before:

# aiHelpDesk: demo O11y watcher / SRE bot app

The goal of this demo app is to showcase aiHelpDesk
self diagnostic and troubleshooting funcionality.

The demo is an SRE bot that not just calls individual aiHelpDesk tools
(e.g. `check_connection`, `get_database_stats`) directly, but also
showcases AI agents's ability to reason through and diagnose a problem.
That's the whole point of aiHelpDesk: accept a symptom (e.g. from
a monitoring system) and trigger an autonomous investigation
using the tools available at its disposal.

To that end, the Gateway not only has tool-specific endpoints (`/api/v1/db/{tool}`),
but it also accepts "here's a problem, please diagnose it" endpoint.

## Architecture

If an upstream agent or an app doesn't talk A2A natively,
the way to send requests to iHelpDesk is via the REST/gRPC Gateway.
The Gateway is a stateless HTTP endpoint that translates POST
requests like `/api/v1/incidents` into an A2A tool calls.

The demo app consists of five sequential phases, all called
via the Gateway, where the normal run only triggers the first two:
the agents discovery and the database health check.

All five phases can be also triggered with the `-force` flag.

## SRE bot <-> aiHelpDesk interaction

The SRE bot is a sample high level agent that initiates a discussion with aiHelpDesk in the attempt to find the state, diagnose a problem and figure out a solution for a particular database. There are a total of five phases in this "chat", which are described below:

```
  Phase 1 — Agent Discovery: `GET /api/v1/agents` to list available agents.
  Phase 2 — Health Check: `POST /api/v1/db/check_connection` with the connection string. If no anomaly keywords are found in the response, aiHelpDesk reports "all clear" and exits (unless `-force` flag is set).
  Phase 3 — AI Diagnosis: `POST /api/v1/query`  →  DB agent starts an autonomous investigation.
  Phase 4 — Create Incident Bundle: aiHelpDesk starts a callback HTTP server on port :9090, then `POST /api/v1/incidents` with `callback_url` pointing back to itself.
  Phase 5 — Await Callback: Blocks until the aiHelpDesk Incident agent's async callback arrives with the `IncidentBundleResult` payload (or it times out after 120s by default).
```

Note in particular the phase 3, which sends a natural language problem description, similar to the following, as an example:

 "Users are reporting errors connecting to the database.
  The `connection_string` is `host=localhost...` 
  Please investigate and report your findings."

 The DB agent then autonomously calls its tools (`check_connection`,
 `get_active_connections`, `get_database_stats`, etc.), analyzes the results,
 and returns a diagnostic summary. The SRE bot prints this diagnosis.

 The flag `-symptom` is designed to override the default symptom
 description sent to the AI agent
 (the default is "Users are reporting database connectivity issues").


## Sample Run #1: ask aiHelpDesk for a Database status report

In example below both SRE bot demo app and aiHelpDesk were deployed via cloning the repo, but there are similer ways to run both using the pre-built binaries, see [VM-based Deployment](../../deploy/docker-compose/README.md) for details.

```
[boris@ ~/helpdesk]$ curl -s http://localhost:8080/api/v1/query -d '{"agent":"database","message":"Check the database health. The connection_string is `host=localhost port=15432 dbname=testdb user=postgres password=testpass`."}'| jq -r '.artifacts[0].parts'
I'll check the database health by starting with a connection test, then gathering key health metrics.
Great! The connection is successful. Now let me gather detailed health metrics.
## Database Health Check Summary ✅

**Connection:** ✅ Successful
- PostgreSQL 16.11 (Debian) on aarch64
- Server: 172.18.0.2:5432
- Database: testdb

---

### 📊 Database Status

| Metric | Value | Status |
|--------|-------|--------|
| **Database Size** | 7636 kB | Healthy |
| **In Recovery** | No | ✅ Ready |
| **Role** | Primary | ✅ Normal |
| **Encoding** | UTF8 | ✅ Standard |

---

### 🔌 Connection Health

| Metric | Value | Status |
|--------|-------|--------|
| **Total Connections** | 6 | ✅ Low (Max: 20) |
| **Active Connections** | 0 | ✅ Idle |
| **Idle in Transaction** | 0 | ✅ None |
| **Waiting on Locks** | 0 | ✅ No contention |
| **Blocking Locks** | None | ✅ Clear |

---

### 📈 Performance Metrics (testdb)

| Metric | Value | Status |
|--------|-------|--------|
| **Cache Hit Ratio** | 99.89% | ✅ Excellent |
| **Commits** | 1,343 | ✅ Normal |
| **Rollbacks** | 1 | ✅ Minimal |
| **Deadlocks** | 0 | ✅ None |
| **Conflicts** | 0 | ✅ None |
| **Rows Inserted** | 100,227 | ✅ Active usage |
| **Rows Deleted** | 90,086 | ✅ Active usage |

---

### ✅ Overall Assessment

**Your database is in EXCELLENT HEALTH:**
- No connection issues or lock contention
- Outstanding cache hit ratio (99.89%)
- No deadlocks or conflicts detected
- Low connection count with plenty of headroom
- Database properly configured and not in recovery mode
- Active DML operations (inserts, deletes) with minimal rollbacks

**No action required** — this database is running optimally!
```

## Sample Run #2: ask aiHelpDesk to troubleshoot

First, let's simulate a "too many clients" PostgreSQL error via
the iHelpDesk built-in [Fault Injection Framework](../../testing/FAULT_INJECTION_TESTING.md):

```
[boris@ ~/helpdesk]$ go run ./testing/cmd/faulttest inject --id db-max-connections --conn "host=localhost port=15432 dbname=testdb user=postgres password=testpass"
time=2026-01-30T23:09:50.211-05:00 level=INFO msg="injecting failure" id=db-max-connections type=docker_exec
Failure injected: Max connections exhausted

Suggested prompt for the agent:
Users are getting "too many clients" errors connecting to the database. The connection_string is `host=localhost port=15432 dbname=testdb user=postgres password=testpass` — use it verbatim for all tool calls. Please investigate.


To tear down: faulttest teardown --id db-max-connections [same flags]
```

Confirm that indeed no new connections can be established:

```
[boris@ ~/helpdesk]$ PGPASSWORD=testpass psql -h localhost -p 15432 -d testdb -U postgres -c "SELECT 1"
psql: error: connection to server at "localhost" (::1), port 15432 failed: FATAL:  sorry, too many clients already
```

Finally, call the SRE bot asking the aiHelpDesk to explain
what's going on:

```
[boris@ ~/helpdesk]$ go run ./cmd/srebot/ -gateway http://localhost:8080 -conn "host=localhost port=15432 dbname=testdb user=postgres password=testpass" -symptom "Why am I getting 'too many clients' errors?"
[23:11:09] ── Phase 1: Agent Discovery ──────────────────────────
[23:11:09] GET /api/v1/agents
[23:11:09] Found 3 agents: incident_agent, postgres_database_agent, k8s_agent

[23:11:09] ── Phase 2: Health Check ─────────────────────────────
[23:11:09] POST /api/v1/db/check_connection
[23:11:12] Anomaly detected: "...---
ERROR — check_connection failed for host=lo..."

[23:11:12] ── Phase 3: AI Diagnosis ─────────────────────────────
[23:11:12] POST /api/v1/query  agent=database
[23:11:12] Prompt: "Why am I getting 'too many clients' errors? The connection_string is `host=localhost port=15432 dbname=testdb user=postg..."
[23:11:21] Agent response (2365 chars):
           ┌──────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┐
           │ I'll investigate the "too many clients" error for you. Let me start  │
           │ by checking the connection and then examining your database          │
           │ configuration and connection statistics.                             │
           │ ---                                                                  │
           │ ERROR — check_connection failed for host=localhost port=15432      │
           │ dbname=testdb user=postgres password=testpass                        │
           │                                                                      │
           │ psql: error: connection to server at "localhost" (::1), port 15432   │
           │ failed: FATAL: sorry, too many clients already                       │
           │                                                                      │
           │ This means: The database has reached its maximum allowed concurrent  │
           │ connections and is rejecting new connection attempts.                │
           │ ---                                                                  │
           │                                                                      │
           │ ## Key Finding                                                       │
           │                                                                      │
           │ Your database is currently at or over its `max_connections` limit    │
           │ and cannot accept any new connections. This is a critical issue      │
           │ that prevents any further investigation using standard database      │
           │ queries.                                                             │
           │                                                                      │
           │ ## What's Happening                                                  │
           │                                                                      │
           │ The "too many clients" error occurs when the number of active        │
           │ connections reaches the `max_connections` configuration parameter.   │
           │ At this point, PostgreSQL rejects any new connection attempts,       │
           │ including diagnostic queries.                                        │
           │                                                                      │
           │ ## What You Need to Do                                               │
           │                                                                      │
           │ **Immediate Actions:**                                               │
           │ 1. **Identify and terminate idle/stuck connections** — You'll      │
           │ need to access the PostgreSQL server directly (via console, SSH, or  │
           │ a connection pool that still has available slots)                    │
           │ 2. **Check system processes** — Use `ps aux | grep postgres` on    │
           │ the server to see active PostgreSQL processes                        │
           │ 3. **Review connection pooler settings** — If using pgBouncer or   │
           │ PgPool-II, check for connection leaks or misconfiguration            │
           │ 4. **Check application connection handling** — Review your         │
           │ applications for:                                                    │
           │    - Connections not being returned to the pool                      │
           │    - Unhandled exceptions causing connection cleanup to be skipped   │
           │    - Long-running transactions holding connections open              │
           │                                                                      │
           │ **To resolve this locally:**                                         │
           │ - Connect directly to the PostgreSQL server console if possible      │
           │ - Run: `SELECT usename, application_name, state, query_start FROM    │
           │ pg_stat_activity ORDER BY query_start;`                              │
           │ - Terminate problematic connections with `SELECT                     │
           │ pg_terminate_backend(pid);`                                          │
           │                                                                      │
           │ **Long-term fixes:**                                                 │
           │ - Increase `max_connections` if your workload genuinely requires it  │
           │ (with adequate memory available)                                     │
           │ - Implement a connection pool (pgBouncer) to limit and manage        │
           │ connections efficiently                                              │
           │ - Implement connection timeouts to automatically close idle          │
           │ connections                                                          │
           │                                                                      │
           │ Would you like guidance on how to safely increase `max_connections`  │
           │ or implement connection pooling?                                     │
           └──────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┘

[23:11:21] ── Phase 4: Create Incident Bundle ───────────────────
[23:11:21] POST /api/v1/incidents
[23:11:21]   infra_key:    srebot-demo
[23:11:21]   callback_url: http://192.168.1.151:9090/callback
[23:11:27] Incident agent responded (744 chars)

[23:11:27] ── Phase 5: Awaiting Callback ────────────────────────
[23:11:27] Listening on :9090 for POST /callback ...
[23:11:27] Callback received!
[23:11:27]   incident_id: d19a6ce8
[23:11:27]   bundle_path: /tmp/incident-d19a6ce8-20260130-231123.tar.gz
[23:11:27]   layers:      [database, os, storage]
...
[23:11:27] Done.
```

Please note that an incident was automatically created by aiHelpDesk in response to a problem detected with the database connections.

Commit message:

chore: add docs on how to run srebot, secbot, govbot, govexplain in k8s and docker containers

cmd/srebot/README.md, after:

# aiHelpDesk: demo O11y watcher / SRE bot app (secbot)

The goal of this demo app is to showcase aiHelpDesk
self diagnostic and troubleshooting funcionality.

The demo is an SRE bot that not just calls individual aiHelpDesk tools
(e.g. `check_connection`, `get_database_stats`) directly, but also
showcases AI agents's ability to reason through and diagnose a problem.
That's the whole point of aiHelpDesk: accept a symptom (e.g. from
a monitoring system) and trigger an autonomous investigation
using the tools available at its disposal.

To that end, the Gateway not only has tool-specific endpoints (`/api/v1/db/{tool}`),
but it also accepts "here's a problem, please diagnose it" endpoint.

## Architecture

If an upstream agent or an app doesn't talk A2A natively,
the way to send requests to iHelpDesk is via the REST/gRPC Gateway.
The Gateway is a stateless HTTP endpoint that translates POST
requests like `/api/v1/incidents` into an A2A tool calls.

The demo app consists of five sequential phases, all called
via the Gateway, where the normal run only triggers the first two:
the agents discovery and the database health check.

All five phases can be also triggered with the `-force` flag.

## SRE bot <-> aiHelpDesk interaction

The SRE bot is a sample high level agent that initiates a discussion with aiHelpDesk in the attempt to find the state, diagnose a problem and figure out a solution for a particular database. There are a total of five phases in this "chat", which are described below:

```
  Phase 1 — Agent Discovery: `GET /api/v1/agents` to list available agents.
  Phase 2 — Health Check: `POST /api/v1/db/check_connection` with the connection string. If no anomaly keywords are found in the response, aiHelpDesk reports "all clear" and exits (unless `-force` flag is set).
  Phase 3 — AI Diagnosis: `POST /api/v1/query`  →  DB agent starts an autonomous investigation.
  Phase 4 — Create Incident Bundle: aiHelpDesk starts a callback HTTP server on port :9090, then `POST /api/v1/incidents` with `callback_url` pointing back to itself.
  Phase 5 — Await Callback: Blocks until the aiHelpDesk Incident agent's async callback arrives with the `IncidentBundleResult` payload (or it times out after 120s by default).
```

Note in particular the phase 3, which sends a natural language problem description, similar to the following, as an example:

 "Users are reporting errors connecting to the database.
  The `connection_string` is `host=localhost...` 
  Please investigate and report your findings."

 The DB agent then autonomously calls its tools (`check_connection`,
 `get_active_connections`, `get_database_stats`, etc.), analyzes the results,
 and returns a diagnostic summary. The SRE bot prints this diagnosis.

 The flag `-symptom` is designed to override the default symptom
 description sent to the AI agent
 (the default is "Users are reporting database connectivity issues").

For details on how to run `srebot` in your specific deployment environment see [here](../../deploy/docker-compose/README.md#36-running-the-sre-bot-srebot) for running via Docker containers and [here](../../deploy/helm/README.md#96-running-the-sre-bot-   srebot) for running on K8s.

## Sample Run #1: ask aiHelpDesk for a Database status report

In example below both SRE bot demo app and aiHelpDesk were deployed via cloning the repo, but there are similer ways to run both using the pre-built binaries, see [VM-based Deployment](../../deploy/docker-compose/README.md) for details.

```
[boris@ ~/helpdesk]$ curl -s http://localhost:8080/api/v1/query -d '{"agent":"database","message":"Check the database health. The connection_string is `host=localhost port=15432 dbname=testdb user=postgres password=testpass`."}'| jq -r '.artifacts[0].parts'
I'll check the database health by starting with a connection test, then gathering key health metrics.
Great! The connection is successful. Now let me gather detailed health metrics.
## Database Health Check Summary ✅

**Connection:** ✅ Successful
- PostgreSQL 16.11 (Debian) on aarch64
- Server: 172.18.0.2:5432
- Database: testdb

---

### 📊 Database Status

| Metric | Value | Status |
|--------|-------|--------|
| **Database Size** | 7636 kB | Healthy |
| **In Recovery** | No | ✅ Ready |
| **Role** | Primary | ✅ Normal |
| **Encoding** | UTF8 | ✅ Standard |

---

### 🔌 Connection Health

| Metric | Value | Status |
|--------|-------|--------|
| **Total Connections** | 6 | ✅ Low (Max: 20) |
| **Active Connections** | 0 | ✅ Idle |
| **Idle in Transaction** | 0 | ✅ None |
| **Waiting on Locks** | 0 | ✅ No contention |
| **Blocking Locks** | None | ✅ Clear |

---

### 📈 Performance Metrics (testdb)

| Metric | Value | Status |
|--------|-------|--------|
| **Cache Hit Ratio** | 99.89% | ✅ Excellent |
| **Commits** | 1,343 | ✅ Normal |
| **Rollbacks** | 1 | ✅ Minimal |
| **Deadlocks** | 0 | ✅ None |
| **Conflicts** | 0 | ✅ None |
| **Rows Inserted** | 100,227 | ✅ Active usage |
| **Rows Deleted** | 90,086 | ✅ Active usage |

---

### ✅ Overall Assessment

**Your database is in EXCELLENT HEALTH:**
- No connection issues or lock contention
- Outstanding cache hit ratio (99.89%)
- No deadlocks or conflicts detected
- Low connection count with plenty of headroom
- Database properly configured and not in recovery mode
- Active DML operations (inserts, deletes) with minimal rollbacks

**No action required** — this database is running optimally!
```

## Sample Run #2: ask aiHelpDesk to troubleshoot

First, let's simulate a "too many clients" PostgreSQL error via
the iHelpDesk built-in [Fault Injection Framework](../../testing/FAULT_INJECTION_TESTING.md):

```
[boris@ ~/helpdesk]$ go run ./testing/cmd/faulttest inject --id db-max-connections --conn "host=localhost port=15432 dbname=testdb user=postgres password=testpass"
time=2026-01-30T23:09:50.211-05:00 level=INFO msg="injecting failure" id=db-max-connections type=docker_exec
Failure injected: Max connections exhausted

Suggested prompt for the agent:
Users are getting "too many clients" errors connecting to the database. The connection_string is `host=localhost port=15432 dbname=testdb user=postgres password=testpass` — use it verbatim for all tool calls. Please investigate.


To tear down: faulttest teardown --id db-max-connections [same flags]
```

Confirm that indeed no new connections can be established:

```
[boris@ ~/helpdesk]$ PGPASSWORD=testpass psql -h localhost -p 15432 -d testdb -U postgres -c "SELECT 1"
psql: error: connection to server at "localhost" (::1), port 15432 failed: FATAL:  sorry, too many clients already
```

Finally, call the SRE bot asking the aiHelpDesk to explain
what's going on:

```
[boris@ ~/helpdesk]$ go run ./cmd/srebot/ -gateway http://localhost:8080 -conn "host=localhost port=15432 dbname=testdb user=postgres password=testpass" -symptom "Why am I getting 'too many clients' errors?"
[23:11:09] ── Phase 1: Agent Discovery ──────────────────────────
[23:11:09] GET /api/v1/agents
[23:11:09] Found 3 agents: incident_agent, postgres_database_agent, k8s_agent

[23:11:09] ── Phase 2: Health Check ─────────────────────────────
[23:11:09] POST /api/v1/db/check_connection
[23:11:12] Anomaly detected: "...---
ERROR — check_connection failed for host=lo..."

[23:11:12] ── Phase 3: AI Diagnosis ─────────────────────────────
[23:11:12] POST /api/v1/query  agent=database
[23:11:12] Prompt: "Why am I getting 'too many clients' errors? The connection_string is `host=localhost port=15432 dbname=testdb user=postg..."
[23:11:21] Agent response (2365 chars):
           ┌──────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┐
           │ I'll investigate the "too many clients" error for you. Let me start  │
           │ by checking the connection and then examining your database          │
           │ configuration and connection statistics.                             │
           │ ---                                                                  │
           │ ERROR — check_connection failed for host=localhost port=15432      │
           │ dbname=testdb user=postgres password=testpass                        │
           │                                                                      │
           │ psql: error: connection to server at "localhost" (::1), port 15432   │
           │ failed: FATAL: sorry, too many clients already                       │
           │                                                                      │
           │ This means: The database has reached its maximum allowed concurrent  │
           │ connections and is rejecting new connection attempts.                │
           │ ---                                                                  │
           │                                                                      │
           │ ## Key Finding                                                       │
           │                                                                      │
           │ Your database is currently at or over its `max_connections` limit    │
           │ and cannot accept any new connections. This is a critical issue      │
           │ that prevents any further investigation using standard database      │
           │ queries.                                                             │
           │                                                                      │
           │ ## What's Happening                                                  │
           │                                                                      │
           │ The "too many clients" error occurs when the number of active        │
           │ connections reaches the `max_connections` configuration parameter.   │
           │ At this point, PostgreSQL rejects any new connection attempts,       │
           │ including diagnostic queries.                                        │
           │                                                                      │
           │ ## What You Need to Do                                               │
           │                                                                      │
           │ **Immediate Actions:**                                               │
           │ 1. **Identify and terminate idle/stuck connections** — You'll      │
           │ need to access the PostgreSQL server directly (via console, SSH, or  │
           │ a connection pool that still has available slots)                    │
           │ 2. **Check system processes** — Use `ps aux | grep postgres` on    │
           │ the server to see active PostgreSQL processes                        │
           │ 3. **Review connection pooler settings** — If using pgBouncer or   │
           │ PgPool-II, check for connection leaks or misconfiguration            │
           │ 4. **Check application connection handling** — Review your         │
           │ applications for:                                                    │
           │    - Connections not being returned to the pool                      │
           │    - Unhandled exceptions causing connection cleanup to be skipped   │
           │    - Long-running transactions holding connections open              │
           │                                                                      │
           │ **To resolve this locally:**                                         │
           │ - Connect directly to the PostgreSQL server console if possible      │
           │ - Run: `SELECT usename, application_name, state, query_start FROM    │
           │ pg_stat_activity ORDER BY query_start;`                              │
           │ - Terminate problematic connections with `SELECT                     │
           │ pg_terminate_backend(pid);`                                          │
           │                                                                      │
           │ **Long-term fixes:**                                                 │
           │ - Increase `max_connections` if your workload genuinely requires it  │
           │ (with adequate memory available)                                     │
           │ - Implement a connection pool (pgBouncer) to limit and manage        │
           │ connections efficiently                                              │
           │ - Implement connection timeouts to automatically close idle          │
           │ connections                                                          │
           │                                                                      │
           │ Would you like guidance on how to safely increase `max_connections`  │
           │ or implement connection pooling?                                     │
           └──────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┘

[23:11:21] ── Phase 4: Create Incident Bundle ───────────────────
[23:11:21] POST /api/v1/incidents
[23:11:21]   infra_key:    srebot-demo
[23:11:21]   callback_url: http://192.168.1.151:9090/callback
[23:11:27] Incident agent responded (744 chars)

[23:11:27] ── Phase 5: Awaiting Callback ────────────────────────
[23:11:27] Listening on :9090 for POST /callback ...
[23:11:27] Callback received!
[23:11:27]   incident_id: d19a6ce8
[23:11:27]   bundle_path: /tmp/incident-d19a6ce8-20260130-231123.tar.gz
[23:11:27]   layers:      [database, os, storage]
...
[23:11:27] Done.
```

Please note that an incident was automatically created by aiHelpDesk in response to a problem detected with the database connections.
