cmd/govbot/README.md, before:

# aiHelpDesk: Governance Compliance Reporter (govbot)

The govbot is a one-shot compliance reporter that queries the Helpdesk
gateway's governance API endpoints and produces a structured compliance
snapshot. It is designed to run on-demand or on a schedule (e.g. daily
cron / Kubernetes CronJob) and optionally post a summary to a Slack webhook.

## Architecture

```
Gateway /api/v1/governance/* → govbot → compliance report + optional Slack alert
```

The govbot is stateless and read-only. It contacts the gateway over HTTP,
fetches governance state from the underlying audit daemon (auditd), and
prints a structured report to stdout. No audit socket access or cluster
privileges are required — only network access to the gateway.

## Compliance Phases

govbot runs seven sequential phases and exits:

```
Phase 1 — Governance Status:     GET /api/v1/governance
Phase 2 — Policy Overview:       Detailed policy rule breakdown from Phase 1 data
Phase 3 — Audit Activity:        GET /api/v1/governance/events?since=...&limit=1000
Phase 4 — Policy Decision Analysis: Per-resource allow/deny/no-match breakdown
Phase 5 — Pending Approvals:     GET /api/v1/governance/approvals/pending
Phase 6 — Chain Integrity:       GET /api/v1/governance/verify
Phase 7 — Compliance Summary:    Aggregated alerts and warnings + optional Slack post
```

## Exit Codes

| Code | Meaning |
|------|---------|
| `0`  | Healthy — no alerts or warnings |
| `1`  | Fatal error — could not reach gateway or Phase 1 failed |
| `2`  | Alerts present — chain integrity failure, policy bypass, or other critical finding |

Exit code `2` is useful for CI pipelines and cron alerting.

## Command Line Flags

```
-gateway string
      Gateway base URL (default "http://localhost:8080")
-since duration
      Look-back window for audit event analysis (default 24h)
-webhook string
      Slack webhook URL for posting the compliance summary (optional)
-dry-run
      Collect and print report but do not post to webhook
```

## Detection Logic

### Phase 4 — Policy Decision Analysis

govbot counts policy decisions by resource over the look-back window:

| Column   | Meaning |
|----------|---------|
| `allow`  | Decisions permitted by a matching rule |
| `deny`   | Decisions denied by a matching rule |
| `req_apr`| Decisions routed to the approval workflow |
| `no_match` ⚠ | Decisions where no policy rule matched — likely missing infrastructure tags |

A non-zero `no_match` count raises a **warning**. This usually means the
infrastructure config (`infraConfig`) does not contain the database host
the agent is connecting to, so the policy engine has no tags to match on.

### Phase 5 — Stale Pending Approvals

Any approval request that has been pending for more than **30 minutes**
is flagged as stale. This indicates the approver notification (Slack/email)
may not have reached its destination. A stale approval count raises a
**warning**.

### Phase 6 — Chain Integrity

govbot calls the audit hash chain verification endpoint. A chain failure
raises an **alert** (not just a warning) and is included in the Slack
message regardless of webhook configuration being enabled.

## Sample Run

```
[boris@ ~/helpdesk]$ go run ./cmd/govbot/ -gateway http://localhost:8080 -since 1h

[09:00:01] ── Phase 1: Governance Status ────────────────────────────
[09:00:01] Audit enabled:     true  (1247 total events)
[09:00:01] Chain valid:       true
[09:00:01] Last event:        2026-02-20T08:59:43Z
[09:00:01] Policy enabled:    true  (2 policies, 5 rules)
[09:00:01] Pending approvals: 0
[09:00:01] Approval notify:   webhook=true  email=false

[09:00:01] ── Phase 2: Policy Overview ──────────────────────────────
[09:00:01]   [enabled] production-databases
[09:00:01]              Restricts access to production database servers
[09:00:01]              Resources: database/prod-db, database/analytics-db
[09:00:01]              read, write                    → allow  [tag:env=production]
[09:00:01]              destructive                    → require_approval  [tag:env=production]
[09:00:01]   [enabled] kubernetes-namespaces
[09:00:01]              Controls K8s namespace access by environment
[09:00:01]              Resources: kubernetes/production
[09:00:01]              read                           → allow
[09:00:01]              write, destructive             → require_approval

[09:00:01] ── Phase 3: Audit Activity (last 1h) ────────────────────
[09:00:01] Events fetched:    42
[09:00:01]   policy_decision                   38
[09:00:01]   tool_call                          2
[09:00:01]   tool_result                        2

[09:00:02] ── Phase 4: Policy Decision Analysis ────────────────────
[09:00:02] Resource                                   allow    deny  req_apr no_match
[09:00:02] ────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
[09:00:02] database/prod-db                              35       0        3       0
[09:00:02] ────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
[09:00:02] TOTAL                                         35       0        3       0

[09:00:02] ── Phase 5: Pending Approvals ───────────────────────────
[09:00:02] No pending approvals

[09:00:02] ── Phase 6: Chain Integrity ──────────────────────────────
[09:00:02] Chain status:  ✓ VALID
[09:00:02] Total events:  1247

[09:00:02] ── Phase 7: Compliance Summary ───────────────────────────
[09:00:02] Overall status: ✓ HEALTHY
[09:00:02] No alerts or warnings. Governance posture is healthy.
```

## Sample Run: With Warnings

When infrastructure tags are missing or approvals go stale:

```
[09:00:02] ── Phase 7: Compliance Summary ───────────────────────────
[09:00:02] Overall status: ⚠ WARNINGS

[09:00:02] Warnings (2):
[09:00:02]   - 8 policy decisions matched no rule (policy_name=default) — likely missing tags in infrastructure config
[09:00:02]   - 1 approval request(s) have been pending for over 30m0s — approvers may not have been notified
```

To fix the `no_match` warning, ensure the database host in the agent's
connection string matches a `db_servers` entry in the infrastructure config
(see [Policy Configuration](../../deploy/helm/README.md#93-policy-configuration)).

## Running in Docker Compose

govbot runs as a one-shot command under the `governance` profile:

```bash
# On-demand compliance report
docker compose --profile governance run govbot

# With Slack webhook
GOVBOT_WEBHOOK=https://hooks.slack.com/... \
  docker compose --profile governance run govbot

# Custom look-back window (last 6 hours)
GOVBOT_SINCE=6h docker compose --profile governance run govbot
```

## Running in Kubernetes

govbot is deployed as a Kubernetes **CronJob** that runs on a configurable
schedule. Enable it in `values.yaml`:

```yaml
governance:
  govbot:
    enabled: true
    schedule: "0 8 * * *"   # daily at 08:00 UTC
    since: "24h"
    webhook: "https://hooks.slack.com/services/..."
```

Then upgrade the Helm release:

```bash
helm upgrade helpdesk ./deploy/helm/helpdesk -f values.yaml
```

To trigger an immediate run outside the schedule:

```bash
kubectl create job govbot-manual \
  --from=cronjob/helpdesk-govbot
```

View the report output:

```bash
kubectl logs -l app.kubernetes.io/component=govbot --tail=200
```

## Integration with AI Governance

govbot is the compliance layer of the AI Governance framework:

| Component  | Role |
|------------|------|
| **auditd** | Records every agent action in a tamper-evident hash chain |
| **auditor** | Real-time stream monitor — alerts on anomalies as they happen |
| **secbot** | Security responder — detects policy violations and creates incident bundles |
| **govbot** | Compliance reporter — periodic snapshot of overall governance posture |
| **approvals CLI** | Human-in-the-loop — approve or deny individual requests |

Run govbot daily to ensure policy coverage is complete and the audit chain
remains intact. Use the Slack webhook to route reports to your compliance
or security operations channel.

Commit message:

chore: add docs on how to run srebot, secbot, govbot, govexplain in k8s and docker containers

cmd/govbot/README.md, after:

# aiHelpDesk: Governance Compliance Reporter (govbot)

The govbot is a one-shot compliance reporter that queries the Helpdesk
gateway's governance API endpoints and produces a structured compliance
snapshot. It is designed to run on-demand or on a schedule (e.g. daily
cron / Kubernetes CronJob) and optionally post a summary to a Slack webhook.

## Architecture

```
Gateway /api/v1/governance/* → govbot → compliance report + optional Slack alert
```

The govbot is stateless and read-only. It contacts the gateway over HTTP,
fetches governance state from the underlying audit daemon (auditd), and
prints a structured report to stdout. No audit socket access or cluster
privileges are required — only network access to the gateway.

## Compliance Phases

govbot runs seven sequential phases and exits:

```
Phase 1 — Governance Status:     GET /api/v1/governance
Phase 2 — Policy Overview:       Detailed policy rule breakdown from Phase 1 data
Phase 3 — Audit Activity:        GET /api/v1/governance/events?since=...&limit=1000
Phase 4 — Policy Decision Analysis: Per-resource allow/deny/no-match breakdown
Phase 5 — Pending Approvals:     GET /api/v1/governance/approvals/pending
Phase 6 — Chain Integrity:       GET /api/v1/governance/verify
Phase 7 — Compliance Summary:    Aggregated alerts and warnings + optional Slack post
```

## Exit Codes

| Code | Meaning |
|------|---------|
| `0`  | Healthy — no alerts or warnings |
| `1`  | Fatal error — could not reach gateway or Phase 1 failed |
| `2`  | Alerts present — chain integrity failure, policy bypass, or other critical finding |

Exit code `2` is useful for CI pipelines and cron alerting.

## Command Line Flags

For details on how to run `govbot` in your specific deployment environment see [here](deploy/docker-compose/README.md#37-running-the-compliance-reporter-govbot) for running via Docker containers and [here](deploy/helm/README.md#97-running-   the-compliance-reporter-govbot) for running on K8s.

```
-gateway string
      Gateway base URL (default "http://localhost:8080")
-since duration
      Look-back window for audit event analysis (default 24h)
-webhook string
      Slack webhook URL for posting the compliance summary (optional)
-dry-run
      Collect and print report but do not post to webhook
```

## Detection Logic

### Phase 4 — Policy Decision Analysis

govbot counts policy decisions by resource over the look-back window:

| Column   | Meaning |
|----------|---------|
| `allow`  | Decisions permitted by a matching rule |
| `deny`   | Decisions denied by a matching rule |
| `req_apr`| Decisions routed to the approval workflow |
| `no_match` ⚠ | Decisions where no policy rule matched — likely missing infrastructure tags |

A non-zero `no_match` count raises a **warning**. This usually means the
infrastructure config (`infraConfig`) does not contain the database host
the agent is connecting to, so the policy engine has no tags to match on.

### Phase 5 — Stale Pending Approvals

Any approval request that has been pending for more than **30 minutes**
is flagged as stale. This indicates the approver notification (Slack/email)
may not have reached its destination. A stale approval count raises a
**warning**.

### Phase 6 — Chain Integrity

govbot calls the audit hash chain verification endpoint. A chain failure
raises an **alert** (not just a warning) and is included in the Slack
message regardless of webhook configuration being enabled.

## Sample Run

```
[boris@ ~/helpdesk]$ go run ./cmd/govbot/ -gateway http://localhost:8080 -since 1h

[09:00:01] ── Phase 1: Governance Status ────────────────────────────
[09:00:01] Audit enabled:     true  (1247 total events)
[09:00:01] Chain valid:       true
[09:00:01] Last event:        2026-02-20T08:59:43Z
[09:00:01] Policy enabled:    true  (2 policies, 5 rules)
[09:00:01] Pending approvals: 0
[09:00:01] Approval notify:   webhook=true  email=false

[09:00:01] ── Phase 2: Policy Overview ──────────────────────────────
[09:00:01]   [enabled] production-databases
[09:00:01]              Restricts access to production database servers
[09:00:01]              Resources: database/prod-db, database/analytics-db
[09:00:01]              read, write                    → allow  [tag:env=production]
[09:00:01]              destructive                    → require_approval  [tag:env=production]
[09:00:01]   [enabled] kubernetes-namespaces
[09:00:01]              Controls K8s namespace access by environment
[09:00:01]              Resources: kubernetes/production
[09:00:01]              read                           → allow
[09:00:01]              write, destructive             → require_approval

[09:00:01] ── Phase 3: Audit Activity (last 1h) ────────────────────
[09:00:01] Events fetched:    42
[09:00:01]   policy_decision                   38
[09:00:01]   tool_call                          2
[09:00:01]   tool_result                        2

[09:00:02] ── Phase 4: Policy Decision Analysis ────────────────────
[09:00:02] Resource                                   allow    deny  req_apr no_match
[09:00:02] ────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
[09:00:02] database/prod-db                              35       0        3       0
[09:00:02] ────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
[09:00:02] TOTAL                                         35       0        3       0

[09:00:02] ── Phase 5: Pending Approvals ───────────────────────────
[09:00:02] No pending approvals

[09:00:02] ── Phase 6: Chain Integrity ──────────────────────────────
[09:00:02] Chain status:  ✓ VALID
[09:00:02] Total events:  1247

[09:00:02] ── Phase 7: Compliance Summary ───────────────────────────
[09:00:02] Overall status: ✓ HEALTHY
[09:00:02] No alerts or warnings. Governance posture is healthy.
```

## Sample Run: With Warnings

When infrastructure tags are missing or approvals go stale:

```
[09:00:02] ── Phase 7: Compliance Summary ───────────────────────────
[09:00:02] Overall status: ⚠ WARNINGS

[09:00:02] Warnings (2):
[09:00:02]   - 8 policy decisions matched no rule (policy_name=default) — likely missing tags in infrastructure config
[09:00:02]   - 1 approval request(s) have been pending for over 30m0s — approvers may not have been notified
```

To fix the `no_match` warning, ensure the database host in the agent's
connection string matches a `db_servers` entry in the infrastructure config
(see [Policy Configuration](../../deploy/helm/README.md#93-policy-configuration)).

## Running in Docker Compose

govbot runs as a one-shot command under the `governance` profile:

```bash
# On-demand compliance report
docker compose --profile governance run govbot

# With Slack webhook
GOVBOT_WEBHOOK=https://hooks.slack.com/... \
  docker compose --profile governance run govbot

# Custom look-back window (last 6 hours)
GOVBOT_SINCE=6h docker compose --profile governance run govbot
```

## Running in Kubernetes

govbot is deployed as a Kubernetes **CronJob** that runs on a configurable
schedule. Enable it in `values.yaml`:

```yaml
governance:
  govbot:
    enabled: true
    schedule: "0 8 * * *"   # daily at 08:00 UTC
    since: "24h"
    webhook: "https://hooks.slack.com/services/..."
```

Then upgrade the Helm release:

```bash
helm upgrade helpdesk ./deploy/helm/helpdesk -f values.yaml
```

To trigger an immediate run outside the schedule:

```bash
kubectl create job govbot-manual \
  --from=cronjob/helpdesk-govbot
```

View the report output:

```bash
kubectl logs -l app.kubernetes.io/component=govbot --tail=200
```

## Integration with AI Governance

govbot is the compliance layer of the AI Governance framework:

| Component  | Role |
|------------|------|
| **auditd** | Records every agent action in a tamper-evident hash chain |
| **auditor** | Real-time stream monitor — alerts on anomalies as they happen |
| **secbot** | Security responder — detects policy violations and creates incident bundles |
| **govbot** | Compliance reporter — periodic snapshot of overall governance posture |
| **approvals CLI** | Human-in-the-loop — approve or deny individual requests |

Run govbot daily to ensure policy coverage is complete and the audit chain
remains intact. Use the Slack webhook to route reports to your compliance
or security operations channel.
