deploy/docker-compose/README.md, before:

# aiHelpDesk: Deployment for VM-based (non-K8s) databases

## 1. Deployment from binary

There are two ways to deploy and run aiHelpDesk on non-K8s environments, i.e. VMs or bare metal. In both cases the first step is downloading the right tarball for your platform. There are five tarballs available for every aiHelpDesk release. The first one that ends with "-deploy.tar.gz" is intended for section 1.1 below (run aiHelpDesk agents in Docker containers). The other four tarballs are binaries specific to a platform and are intended for section 1.2

```
  ┌─────────────────────────────────────┬──────────────────────────────┐──────────────────────────────────────┐────────────┐
  │           Tarball Name              │               For            │               Platform               │ See section│
  ├─────────────────────────────────────┼──────────────────────────────┤──────────────────────────────────────┤────────────┤
  │ helpdesk-vX.Y.Z-deploy.tar.gz       │ running in Docker containers │ Agnostic                             │    1.1     │
  ├─────────────────────────────────────┼──────────────────────────────┤──────────────────────────────────────┤────────────┤
  │ helpdesk-vX.Y.Z-linux-amd64.tar.gz  │ running on a host            │ Linux on x86_64 (most servers, VMs)  │    1.2     │
  ├─────────────────────────────────────┼                              ┤──────────────────────────────────────┤            │
  │ helpdesk-vX.Y.Z-linux-arm64.tar.gz  │                              │ Linux on ARM (Graviton, Ampere)      │            │
  ├─────────────────────────────────────┼                              ┤──────────────────────────────────────┤            │
  │ helpdesk-vX.Y.Z-darwin-amd64.tar.gz │                              │ macOS on Intel                       │            │
  ├─────────────────────────────────────┼                              ┤──────────────────────────────────────┤            │
  │ helpdesk-vX.Y.Z-darwin-arm64.tar.gz │                              │ macOS on Apple Silicon               │            │
  └─────────────────────────────────────┴──────────────────────────────┘──────────────────────────────────────┘────────────┘
```

The last four tarballs are platform specific and are intended for users who want to run the agents directly on a host without Docker.

Here's the aiHelpDesk release [download page](https://github.com/borisdali/helpdesk/releases/).


  ### 1.1 The Docker route (relies on Docker Compose with the pull of the pre-built image from GHCR)

To run aiHelpDesk in Docker containers, download the "-deploy.tar.gz" platform agnostic tarball and run the following commands:

```
  tar xzf helpdesk-v.0.1.0-deploy.tar.gz
  cd helpdesk-v0.1.0-deploy/docker-compose
  cp .env.example .env
  cp infrastructure.json.example infrastructure.json
  # edit both files
  docker compose up -d

  source ./.env
  docker compose --profile interactive run orchestrator
```

The last two commands are optional and intended for the human operators as it starts an interactive aiHelpDesk session.


  ### 1.2 The non-Docker route to run the pre-built binaries on a host

To run aiHelpDesk directly on a host (without Docker), download the right platform-specific tarballs and run the following commands:

```
  tar xzf helpdesk-v0.1.0-darwin-arm64.tar.gz   # pick your platform
  cd helpdesk-v0.1.0-darwin-arm64

  (Mac specific): depending on your Mac OS version, you may need to remove the quarantine flag that Mac automatically puts on the software downloaded from the Internet:
	`xattr -d com.apple.quarantine *`

  # Option A: set env vars directly
export HELPDESK_MODEL_VENDOR=anthropic
export HELPDESK_MODEL_NAME=claude-haiku-4-5-20251001
export HELPDESK_API_KEY=<your-API-key>
./startall.sh

  # Option B: use a .env file
cat > .env <<EOF
HELPDESK_MODEL_VENDOR=anthropic
HELPDESK_MODEL_NAME=claude-haiku-4-5-20251001
HELPDESK_API_KEY=your-key
HELPDESK_INFRA_CONFIG=./infrastructure.json
EOF
./startall.sh
```

  The script:
  - Sources `.env` if present
  - Validates required env vars
  - Starts all 3 agents + Gateway in the background (logs go to `/tmp/helpdesk-*.log`)
  - Launches the interactive orchestrator in the foreground
  - Cleans up all background processes on exit/`Ctrl-C`
  - `--no-repl` runs headless (gateway only, no orchestrator)
  - `--stop` kills any running helpdesk processes

N.B: Please note that the binary tarballs expect `psql` and `kubectl` already installed on the host — those are baked into the Docker image (see option 1.1), but not into the Go binaries (this option 1.2).


## 2. Deployment from source (by cloning the repo):

 ### 2.1 Clone the aiHelpDesk repo :-)

 ### 2.2 Run Docker Compose to start all aiHelpDesk agents

```
  docker compose -f deploy/docker-compose/docker-compose.yaml up -d
```

See the [sample log](INSTALL_from_source_sample_log.md)  of running the above commands.


  ## 2.3 Interactive/Human session: Deployment from source (by cloning the repo)

Once all the aiHelpDesk agents are up, copy and adjust the `.env` file and the `infrastructure.json` file.
The former contains the LLM info (e.g. Anthropic, Gemini, etc.), while the latter file contains the databases that aiHelpDesk needs to be are of.

```
  cp deploy/docker-compose/.env.example deploy/docker-compose/.env
  cp deploy/docker-compose/infrastructure.json.example deploy/docker-compose/infrastructure.json
```

If you prefer the list of databases (that go into `infrastructure.json` file) to reside elsewhere, set the `HELPDESK_INFRA_CONFIG` env variable as explained in `.env` file (ignore the Kube stuff, which isn't relevant for the VM deployment):

```
[boris@ ~/helpdesk/deploy/docker-compose]$ cat .env.example
# Model configuration (required)
HELPDESK_MODEL_VENDOR=anthropic
HELPDESK_MODEL_NAME=claude-haiku-4-5-20251001
HELPDESK_API_KEY=<your-api-key-here>

# Kubeconfig path for K8s and incident agents (optional)
KUBECONFIG=~/.kube/config

# Infrastructure inventory for the orchestrator (optional).
# Path to a JSON file describing your database servers, K8s clusters, and VMs.
# Copy the example and edit it with your real servers:
#   cp infrastructure.json.example infrastructure.json
HELPDESK_INFRA_CONFIG=./infrastructure.json
```

Next, as a human operator, run the interactive session by invoking the Orchestator:

```
  docker compose -f deploy/docker-compose/docker-compose.yaml --profile interactive run orchestrator
```

See the [sample log](INSTALL_from_source_sample_interactive_log.md)  of running the above commands.


  ### 2.4 SRE bot demo: Deployment from source (by cloning the repo)

Here's an example of an SRE bot detecting that the `db.example.com` is going offline, which results in a failure to establish a connection. As a result, aiHelpDesk automatically records an incident and creates a troubelshooting bundle to investigate further either interally or by sending to a vendor:

```
  docker run --rm --network docker-compose_default helpdesk:latest /usr/local/bin/srebot -gateway http://gateway:8080 -conn 'host=db.example.com port=5432 dbname=myapp user=admin'
```

See the [sample log](INSTALL_from_source_sample_SRE_bot_log.md)  of running the above commands.

Commit message:

feat: add a new get_server_info tool to the database agent.
Among other things, this tool is to help answer questions
about a database server uptime.

deploy/docker-compose/README.md, after:

# aiHelpDesk: Deployment for VM-based (non-K8s) databases

## 1. Deployment from binary

There are two ways to deploy and run aiHelpDesk on non-K8s environments, i.e. VMs or bare metal. In both cases the first step is downloading the right tarball for your platform. There are five tarballs available for every aiHelpDesk release. The first one that ends with "-deploy.tar.gz" is intended for section 1.1 below (run aiHelpDesk agents in Docker containers). The other four tarballs are binaries specific to a platform and are intended for section 1.2

```
  ┌─────────────────────────────────────┬──────────────────────────────┐──────────────────────────────────────┐────────────┐
  │           Tarball Name              │               For            │               Platform               │ See section│
  ├─────────────────────────────────────┼──────────────────────────────┤──────────────────────────────────────┤────────────┤
  │ helpdesk-vX.Y.Z-deploy.tar.gz       │ running in Docker containers │ Agnostic                             │    1.1     │
  ├─────────────────────────────────────┼──────────────────────────────┤──────────────────────────────────────┤────────────┤
  │ helpdesk-vX.Y.Z-linux-amd64.tar.gz  │ running on a host            │ Linux on x86_64 (most servers, VMs)  │    1.2     │
  ├─────────────────────────────────────┼                              ┤──────────────────────────────────────┤            │
  │ helpdesk-vX.Y.Z-linux-arm64.tar.gz  │                              │ Linux on ARM (Graviton, Ampere)      │            │
  ├─────────────────────────────────────┼                              ┤──────────────────────────────────────┤            │
  │ helpdesk-vX.Y.Z-darwin-amd64.tar.gz │                              │ macOS on Intel                       │            │
  ├─────────────────────────────────────┼                              ┤──────────────────────────────────────┤            │
  │ helpdesk-vX.Y.Z-darwin-arm64.tar.gz │                              │ macOS on Apple Silicon               │            │
  └─────────────────────────────────────┴──────────────────────────────┘──────────────────────────────────────┘────────────┘
```

The last four tarballs are platform specific and are intended for users who want to run the agents directly on a host without Docker.

Here's the aiHelpDesk release [download page](https://github.com/borisdali/helpdesk/releases/).


  ### 1.1 The Docker route (relies on Docker Compose with the pull of the pre-built image from GHCR)

To run aiHelpDesk in Docker containers, download the "-deploy.tar.gz" platform agnostic tarball and run the following commands:

```
  tar xzf helpdesk-v.0.1.0-deploy.tar.gz
  cd helpdesk-v0.1.0-deploy/docker-compose
  cp .env.example .env
  cp infrastructure.json.example infrastructure.json
  # edit both files
  docker compose up -d

  source ./.env
  docker compose --profile interactive run orchestrator
```

The last two commands are optional and intended for the human operators as it starts an interactive aiHelpDesk session.

N.B: Optional: To avoid being prompted by the aiHelpDesk Orchtestator for password every time its Database Agent needs to access PostgreSQL, just create ~/.pgpass on the host running the agent (following the standard PostgreSQL approach and works automatically with psql):

```
  # Format: hostname:port:database:username:password
  orders-db.prod.example.com:5432:orders:app_user:secretpass
  users-db.prod.example.com:5432:users:app_user:secretpass
  *:5432:*:postgres:localdevpass
```

  Then secure it:

```
  chmod 600 ~/.pgpass
```

  ### 1.2 The non-Docker route to run the pre-built binaries on a host

To run aiHelpDesk directly on a host (without Docker), download the right platform-specific tarballs and run the following commands:

```
  tar xzf helpdesk-v0.1.0-darwin-arm64.tar.gz   # pick your platform
  cd helpdesk-v0.1.0-darwin-arm64

  (Mac specific): depending on your Mac OS version, you may need to remove the quarantine flag that Mac automatically puts on the software downloaded from the Internet:
	`xattr -d com.apple.quarantine *`

  # Option A: set env vars directly
export HELPDESK_MODEL_VENDOR=anthropic
export HELPDESK_MODEL_NAME=claude-haiku-4-5-20251001
export HELPDESK_API_KEY=<your-API-key>
./startall.sh

  # Option B: use a .env file
cat > .env <<EOF
HELPDESK_MODEL_VENDOR=anthropic
HELPDESK_MODEL_NAME=claude-haiku-4-5-20251001
HELPDESK_API_KEY=your-key
HELPDESK_INFRA_CONFIG=./infrastructure.json
EOF
./startall.sh
```

  The script:
  - Sources `.env` if present
  - Validates required env vars
  - Starts all 3 agents + Gateway in the background (logs go to `/tmp/helpdesk-*.log`)
  - Launches the interactive orchestrator in the foreground
  - Cleans up all background processes on exit/`Ctrl-C`
  - `--no-repl` runs headless (gateway only, no orchestrator)
  - `--stop` kills any running helpdesk processes

N.B: Please note that the binary tarballs expect `psql` and `kubectl` already installed on the host — those are baked into the Docker image (see option 1.1), but not into the Go binaries (this option 1.2).

N.B: Please see the note above in section 1.1 regarding the password prompts.


## 2. Deployment from source (by cloning the repo):

 ### 2.1 Clone the aiHelpDesk repo :-)

 ### 2.2 Run Docker Compose to start all aiHelpDesk agents

```
  docker compose -f deploy/docker-compose/docker-compose.yaml up -d
```

See the [sample log](INSTALL_from_source_sample_log.md)  of running the above commands.


  ## 2.3 Interactive/Human session: Deployment from source (by cloning the repo)

Once all the aiHelpDesk agents are up, copy and adjust the `.env` file and the `infrastructure.json` file.
The former contains the LLM info (e.g. Anthropic, Gemini, etc.), while the latter file contains the databases that aiHelpDesk needs to be are of.

```
  cp deploy/docker-compose/.env.example deploy/docker-compose/.env
  cp deploy/docker-compose/infrastructure.json.example deploy/docker-compose/infrastructure.json
```

If you prefer the list of databases (that go into `infrastructure.json` file) to reside elsewhere, set the `HELPDESK_INFRA_CONFIG` env variable as explained in `.env` file (ignore the Kube stuff, which isn't relevant for the VM deployment):

```
[boris@ ~/helpdesk/deploy/docker-compose]$ cat .env.example
# Model configuration (required)
HELPDESK_MODEL_VENDOR=anthropic
HELPDESK_MODEL_NAME=claude-haiku-4-5-20251001
HELPDESK_API_KEY=<your-api-key-here>

# Kubeconfig path for K8s and incident agents (optional)
KUBECONFIG=~/.kube/config

# Infrastructure inventory for the orchestrator (optional).
# Path to a JSON file describing your database servers, K8s clusters, and VMs.
# Copy the example and edit it with your real servers:
#   cp infrastructure.json.example infrastructure.json
HELPDESK_INFRA_CONFIG=./infrastructure.json
```

Next, as a human operator, run the interactive session by invoking the Orchestator:

```
  docker compose -f deploy/docker-compose/docker-compose.yaml --profile interactive run orchestrator
```

See the [sample log](INSTALL_from_source_sample_interactive_log.md)  of running the above commands.


  ### 2.4 SRE bot demo: Deployment from source (by cloning the repo)

Here's an example of an SRE bot detecting that the `db.example.com` is going offline, which results in a failure to establish a connection. As a result, aiHelpDesk automatically records an incident and creates a troubelshooting bundle to investigate further either interally or by sending to a vendor:

```
  docker run --rm --network docker-compose_default helpdesk:latest /usr/local/bin/srebot -gateway http://gateway:8080 -conn 'host=db.example.com port=5432 dbname=myapp user=admin'
```

See the [sample log](INSTALL_from_source_sample_SRE_bot_log.md)  of running the above commands.
